ARROW-14759: [Doc] Steps in making your first PR - test in R (#12140)
apache/arrow: docs/source/developers/guide/step_by_step/testing.rst

      **Structure**

      Expect the usual testthat folder structure:

      .. code-block:: R

         tests
          ├── testthat      # test files live here
          └── testthat.R    # runs tests when R CMD check runs (e.g. with devtools::check())

      This is the fundamental structure of testing in R with ``testthat``. Files such as ``testthat.R`` are not expected to change very often. For the ``arrow`` R package ``testthat.R`` also defines how the results of the various tests are displayed / reported in the console.

      Usually, most files in the ``R/`` sub-folder have a corresponding test file in ``tests/testthat``.

      **Running tests**

      To run all tests in a package locally call

      .. code-block:: R

         devtools::test()

      in the R console. Alternatively, you can use

      .. code:: console

         $ make test

      in the shell.

      You can run the tests in a single test file you have open with

      .. code-block:: R

         devtools::test_active_file()

      All tests are also run as part of our continuous integration (CI) pipelines.

>       The Arrow R Developer guide also has a section on running tests. You can check it out `here <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/developing.html#running-tests>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The `Arrow R Developer guide also has a section<https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/developing.html#running-tests>`_ on running tests.
```

Avoids the click here type of pattern (and is a bit more concise.

Reviewer: I think I got the RST correct here, but not sure about that `_` at the end, that seems out of place, but I'm no RST expert

Author: I think the `_` is needed after `<>`

      **Good practice**

      In general any change to source code needs to be accompanied by unit tests. All tests are expected to pass before a pull request is merged.

      * Add functionality -> add unit tests
      * Modify functionality -> update unit tests
      * Solve a bug -> add unit test before solving it, which helps prove the bug and its fix
      * Performance improvements should be reflected in benchmarks (which are also tests)
      * An exception could be refactoring functionality that is fully covered by unit tests

>       If the new functionality is a user-facing or API change, you will almost certainly need to change tests — if no tests need to be changed it might mean the tests aren't right! If the new functionality is a refactor and no APIs are changing, there might not need to be test changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      A good rule of thumb is: If the new functionality is a user-facing or API change, you will almost certainly need to change tests — if no tests need to be changed it might mean the tests aren't right! If the new functionality is a refactor and no APIs are changing, there might not need to be test changes.
```

      **Testing helpers**

      To complement the ``testthat`` functionality, the ``arrow`` R package has defined a series of specific utility functions (called helpers), such as:

      * expectations - these start with ``expect_`` and are used to compare objects

>             - for example, ``expect_altrep_roundtrip()`` compares the result of a function ``fn`` run on a vector ``x`` with the result of the same function run on the altrep version of ``x``. More generally, ``expect_…_roundtrip()`` functions take an input, convert it to some other format (e.g. arrow) and then convert it back, confirming that the values are the same.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should also provide an example here that shows a call? The two function arguments feel a bit out of place / floating out there: either we could drop them, or we should show them in use in `expect_altrep_roundtrip()`

Author: Done. I changed the order of the sentences and went with general description of `expect_..._roundtrip()` + example

      * ``skip_`` - skips a unit test - think of them as acceptable fails. Situations in which we might want to skip unit tests:

        - ``skip_if_r_version()`` - this is a specific ``arrow`` skip. For example, we use this to skip a unit test when the R version is 3.5.0 and below (``skip_if_r_version(“3.5.0”)``). You will likely see it used when the functionality we are testing depends on features introduced after version 3.5.0 of R (such as the alternative representation of vectors, Altrep, introduced in R 3.5.0, but with significant additions in subsequent releases). As part of our CI workflow we test against different versions of R and this is where this feature comes in.

>         - ``skip_if_not_available()`` - another specific {arrow} skip. Arrow (libarrow) has a series of additional features that can be switched on or off (but this needs to happen at build time). If a unit test depends on such a feature and this feature is not available (i.e. was not selected when libarrow was built) the test is skipped, as opposed to having a failed test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - ``skip_if_not_available()`` - another specific {arrow} skip. Arrow (libarrow) has a number of optional features that can be switched on or off (which happens at build time). If a unit test depends on such a feature and this feature is not available (i.e. was not selected when libarrow was built) the test is skipped, as opposed to having a failed test.
```

Author: Done

      If the tests start failing, try to recompile
      PyArrow or C++.

      .. note::

         **Recompiling Cython**

         If you only make changes to `.py` files, you do not need to
         recompile PyArrow. However, you should recompile it if you make
         changes in `.pyx` or `.pxd` files.

         To do that run this command again:

         .. code:: console

            $ python setup.py build_ext --inplace

      .. note::

         **Recompiling C++**

         Similarly, you will need to recompile the C++ code if you have
         made changes to any C++ files. In this case,
         re-run the cmake commands again.

   .. tab:: R tests

      We use `testthat <https://testthat.r-lib.org/index.html>`_ for unit testing in R. More specifically, we use the `3rd edition of testthat <https://testthat.r-lib.org/articles/third-edition.html>`_. On rare occasions we might want the behaviour of the 2nd edition of testthat, which is indicated by ``testthat::local_edition(2)``.

      **Structure**

      Expect the usual testthat folder structure:

      .. code-block:: R

         tests

>           ├── testthat      # unit test files live here

Author: Done

>           └── testthat.R    # runs tests when R CMD check runs (e.g. with devtools::check())

Author: Done.

      Usually, most files in the ``R/`` sub-folder have a corresponding test file in ``tests/testthat``.

      **Running tests**

      To run all tests in a package locally call

      .. code-block:: R

         devtools::test()

      in the R console. Alternatively, you can use

      .. code:: console

         $ make test

      in the shell.

      You can run the tests in a single test file you have open with

      .. code-block:: R

         devtools::test_active_file()

      All tests are also run as part of our continuous integration (CI) pipelines.

      **Good practice**

      In general any change to source code needs to be accompanied by unit tests. All tests are expected to pass before a pull request is merged.

      * Add functionality -> add unit tests

>       * Modify functionality -> update unit tests

Reviewer: I like the simplicity of these bullet points, so maybe this should be in a footnote or in a paragraph below this, but we should also include something like:

If the new functionality is a user-facing or API change, you will almost certainly need to change tests — if no tests need to be changed it might mean the tests aren't right! If the new functionality is a refactor and no APIs are changing, there might not need to be test changes.

Author: My last bullet point covers refactoring, but I've included your entire paragraph below the list. Done

>       * Solve a bug -> add unit test before solving it, which helps prove the bug and its fix

Reviewer: 💯

      * Performance improvements should be reflected in benchmarks (which are also tests)
      * An exception could be refactoring functionality that is fully covered by unit tests

      **Testing helpers**

      To complement the ``testthat`` functionality, the ``arrow`` R package has defined a series of specific utility functions (called helpers), such as:

      * Expectations - these start with ``expect_`` and are used to compare objects
            - for example, ``expect_altrep_roundtrip()`` compares the result
            of a function ``fn`` run on a vector ``x`` with the result of the
            same function run on the altrep version of ``x``. More generally,
            expect_…_roundtrip() functions do …

            .. TODO _fill in the blanks_

>             .. TODO

Reviewer: I presume these will be done in another commit? OR should we remove them / add Jiras for following up?

Author: I will do them in another commit (incorporating your comments & suggestions)

        - ``skip_if_r_version()`` - this is a specific ``arrow`` skip. For example, we use this to skip a unit test when the R version is 3.5.0 and below (``skip_if_r_version(“3.5.0”)``). You will likely see it used when the functionality we are testing depends on features introduced after version 3.5.0 of R (such as the alternative representation of vectors, Altrep, introduced in R 3.5.0, but with significant additions in subsequent releases). As part of our CI workflow we test against different versions of R and this is where this feature comes in.
        - ``skip_if_not_available()`` - another specific {arrow} skip. Arrow (libarrow) has a series of additional features that can be switched on or off (but this needs to happen at build time). If a unit test depends on such a feature and this feature is not available (i.e. was not selected when libarrow was built) the test is skipped, as opposed to having a failed test.
        - ``skip_if_offline()`` - will not run tests that require an internet connection
        - ``skip_on_os()`` - for unit tests that are OS specific.

>       *Important*: Once the conditions for a ``skip_()`` statement is met, no other line of code in the same ``test_that()`` test block will get executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      *Important*: Once the conditions for a ``skip_()`` statement is met, no other line of code in the same ``test_that()`` test block will get executed. If the skip is outside of a `test_that()` code block, it will skip the rest of the file.
```

      If the tests start failing, try to recompile
      PyArrow or C++.

      .. note::

         **Recompiling Cython**

         If you only make changes to `.py` files, you do not need to
         recompile PyArrow. However, you should recompile it if you make
         changes in `.pyx` or `.pxd` files.

         To do that run this command again:

         .. code:: console

            $ python setup.py build_ext --inplace

      .. note::

         **Recompiling C++**

         Similarly, you will need to recompile the C++ code if you have
         made changes to any C++ files. In this case,
         re-run the cmake commands again.

   .. tab:: R tests

      We use `testthat <https://testthat.r-lib.org/index.html>`_ for unit testing in R. More specifically, we use the `3rd edition of testthat <https://testthat.r-lib.org/articles/third-edition.html>`_. On rare occasions we might want the behaviour of the 2nd edition of testthat, which is indicated by ``testthat::local_edition(2)``.

      **Structure**

      Expect the usual testthat folder structure:

>       .. TODO make sure the format the dir tree below is formatted nicely (maybe as a code block)
>       tests
>         ├── testthat      # unit test files live here
>         └── testthat.R    # runs tests when R CMD check runs (e.g. with `devtools::check()`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      
      .. code-block:: R
      
         tests
           ├── testthat      # unit test files live here
           └── testthat.R    # runs tests when R CMD check runs (e.g. with `devtools::check()`)
```

This works well in the html version of the docs.

Author: Cool. Many thanks. Done

      Usually, most files in the ``R/`` sub-folder have a corresponding test file in ``tests/testthat``.

      **Running tests**

>       To run all tests in a package locally use ``devtools::test()`` in the R console. Alternatively, you can use ``make test`` in the shell.

Author: @jonkeane should we add more here about `make test`?

Reviewer: A link to https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/developing.html#common-developer-workflow-tasks (or copying that content) might be nice.

Author: I linked to it since the information is slightly more in-depth and we do not need to keep the 2 testing docs in sync.

>       To run all tests in a package locally use ``devtools::test()`` in the R console. Alternatively, you can use ``make test`` in the shell.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      To run all tests in a package locally use this command in the R console:

      .. code-block:: R

         devtools::test()

      Alternatively, you can use this in the shell:

      .. code:: console

         $ make test
```

It is easier to find the necessary info in the html like so, with code being highlighted.

      You can run the tests in a single test file you have open with ``devtools::test_active_file()``.

      All tests are also run as part of our continuous integration (CI) pipelines.

      **Good practice**

      In general any change to source code needs to be accompanied by unit tests. All tests are expected to pass before a pull request is merged.

      * Add functionality -> add unit tests
      * Modify functionality -> update unit tests
      * Solve a bug -> add unit test before solving it, which helps prove the bug and its fix
      * Performance improvements should be reflected in benchmarks (which are also tests)
      * An exception could be refactoring functionality that is fully covered by unit tests

>       ** Testing helpers**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      **Testing helpers**
```

Author: Done

      To complement the ``testthat`` functionality, the ``arrow`` R package has defined a series of specific utility functions (called helpers), such as:

      * Expectations - these start with ``expect_`` and are used to compare objects
            - for example, ``expect_altrep_roundtrip()`` compares the result
            of a function ``fn`` run on a vector ``x`` with the result of the
            same function run on the altrep version of ``x``. More generally,

>             expect_…_roundtrip() functions do … .. TODO _fill int the blanks_

Author: @jonkeane I'm looking for a sentence here to summarise what the `expect_.._roundtrip()` family of functions does. Do you have any suggestions?

Reviewer: Ah I didn't see these questions in my first run though (thanks Github!)

It's kind of defining what roundtrip means, but I would say something like "They take an input, convert it to some other format (e.g. arrow) and then convert it back, confirming that the values are the same."

Author: Cool. Thanks.

      If the tests start failing, try to recompile
      PyArrow or C++.

      .. note::

         **Recompiling Cython**

         If you only make changes to `.py` files, you do not need to
         recompile PyArrow. However, you should recompile it if you make
         changes in `.pyx` or `.pxd` files.

         To do that run this command again:

         .. code:: console

            $ python setup.py build_ext --inplace

      .. note::

         **Recompiling C++**

         Similarly, you will need to recompile the C++ code if you have
         made changes to any C++ files. In this case,
         re-run the cmake commands again.

   .. tab:: R tests

      We use `testthat <https://testthat.r-lib.org/index.html>`_ for unit testing in R. More specifically, we use the `3rd edition of testthat <https://testthat.r-lib.org/articles/third-edition.html>`_. On rare occasions we might want the behaviour of the 2nd edition of testthat, which is indicated by ``testthat::local_edition(2)``.

      **Structure**

      Expect the usual testthat folder structure:

>       .. code-block:: R
>       tests
>         ├── testthat      # unit test files live here
>         └── testthat.R    # runs tests when R CMD check runs (e.g. with `devtools::check()`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      .. code-block:: R

         tests
           ├── testthat      # unit test files live here
           └── testthat.R    # runs tests when R CMD check runs (e.g. with `devtools::check()`)
```

Needs an empty line and an indentation ;)

      **Running tests**

      To run all tests in a package locally use ``devtools::test()`` in the R console. Alternatively, you can use ``make test`` in the shell.

      You can run the tests in a single test file you have open with ``devtools::test_active_file()``.

      All tests are also run as part of our continuous integration (CI) pipelines.

      **Good practice**

      In general any change to source code needs to be accompanied by unit tests. All tests are expected to pass before a pull request is merged.

      * Add functionality -> add unit tests
      * Modify functionality -> update unit tests
      * Solve a bug -> add unit test before solving it, which helps prove the bug and its fix
      * Performance improvements should be reflected in benchmarks (which are also tests)
      * An exception could be refactoring functionality that is fully covered by unit tests

      **Testing helpers**

      To complement the ``testthat`` functionality, the ``arrow`` R package has defined a series of specific utility functions (called helpers), such as:

      * Expectations - these start with ``expect_`` and are used to compare objects

>             - for example, ``expect_altrep_roundtrip()`` compares the result
>             of a function ``fn`` run on a vector ``x`` with the result of the
>             same function run on the altrep version of ``x``. More generally,
>             expect_…_roundtrip() functions do … .. TODO _fill int the blanks_
>             .. TODO
>             - Expect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

        - for example, ``expect_altrep_roundtrip()`` compares the result
          of a function ``fn`` run on a vector ``x`` with the result of the
          same function run on the altrep version of ``x``. More generally,
          ``expect_…_roundtrip()`` functions do …

        .. TODO _fill int the blanks_
        .. TODO
        
        - Expect
```
